In this lecture, you'll learn about the last of our NAT types, which is PAT, Port Address Translation.
This allows the same IP address to be reused multiple times for translations.
So with Standard Dynamic NAT that you saw in the last lecture, the inside host are translated to public
IP addresses on a first come, first served basis
when we send the traffic out. That requires a public IP address for every inside host which communicates
with the outside network.
When all the addresses in the pool have been used, new outbound connections from other inside hosts
are going to fail because there's no address left to translate them to.
We've already used up all of the addresses in our pool.
Port Address Translation or PAT is an extension to NAT that permits multiple devices to be mapped
to a single public IP address.
So this is the solution to that problem. With PAT,
you don't need a public IP address for every inside host.
The router tracks translations by IP address and layer 4 port number as well.
So typically for real world deployments, we're going to need this because we're going to have a lot
more hosts on the inside with private IP addresses
than we're going to have public IP addresses on the outside available because most public IP addresses
cost money.
So we're going to use PAT so that we can reuse them for multiple hosts on the inside. Because different
inside hosts are assigned different port numbers when we use PAT, the router knows which host to send the return
traffic to, even when the public IP address is the same.
So let's have a look at how this works in the lab.
We're using the same lab topology again.
I've got my host on the inside on the 10.0.2.0/24 subnet.
I don't need to use this for my internal server because I've got a permanent fixed Static NAT translation
for that. But on my normal PCs, I've got probably a load of PCs on the inside there and I don't have
enough public IP addresses to give them all of their own one.
So I'm going to use PAT so they can all get Internet access
at the same time. The Dynamic NAT with overload uses PAT to allow more clients to be translated
than IP addresses are available in the NAT pool. Dynamic NAT
with overload is really just a type of PAT.
It's not a different thing. If the NAT pool is, for example, 203.0.113.4 to
203.0.113.6,
the first two hosts which initiate outbound connections will be translated to 203.0.113.4,
for the first one, and 203.0.113.5 for the second one.
So exactly the same as Standard Dynamic.
NAT. Where it changes is when we get to the end of the NAT pool, the third host will be translated to
203.0.113.6 and the router will track which source port number was used
in its translation table before fifth, sixth, etc..
Hosts will also be translated to 203.0.113.6 because that's the highest address
in the pool.
But they will use different source port numbers. When the return traffic is sent back, the router checks
the destination port number to see which host to forward it to.
So it's tracking based on IP address and port number because we've also got the port number that allows
us to differentiate between the different hosts.
They're using the same IP address.
So let's walk through this with an example. So here,
we do have the pool of the three addresses, 203.0.113.4 to
203.0.113.6.
And we've done our configuration.
You'll see how you do the configuration coming up in a minute. So our first host on the inside,
10.10.10.10,
it sends traffic out to a Web server at 203.0.113.10.
So it's going to a Web server.
So that's going to be the destination IP address.
And the destination port will be port 80.
In that example, 10.10.10.10 uses the source port number 49165.
Whichever operating system is running on that host is going to choose a random source port number.
So that's what it came up with in our example.
When it goes through the router, it's going to match the NAT rule.
So the router will NAT that traffic and it's going to change the source IP address from
10.10.10.10 to
203.0.113.4.
It's also changing the source port number here from 49165 to 4096. That traffic
gets sent out to the Web server.
And the Web server sees it as coming from the NAT'd source of 203.0.113.4 and
port number 4096. So the Web server will send traffic back.
It sends it to a destination IP address and port number of 203.0.113.4
port 4096, the same place it came from.
When that return traffic reaches the router,
it's got a matching entry in the NAT translation table.
So it knows to send that to 10.10.10.10 port 49165. Then another host
sends some traffic out to the Web server. That comes from 10.10.10.11 port 49158
on the inside. The router NATs it to 203.0.113.5 and source port number
4097.
When the return traffic comes back from the Web server,
it's sent to a destination of 203.0.113.5 port 4097.
The router sees it's got a matching translation in its NAT table.
So it sends that out to 10.10.10.11 port 49158 where it originally
came from.
Then a third PC sends traffic out to the Internet.
That's 10.10.10.12 port number 49152.
Notice that the first two hosts were translated to IP addresses 203.0.113.4 and
203.0.113.5,
the first two addresses in our pool.
This third host gets translated to the last IP address in our pool, which is
203.0.113.6.
And it's port number gets changed to 4098.
You know the drill already.
When the return traffic comes back from the server,
it's sent to our destination of 203.0.113.6 port 4098.
And the router knows to send that to 10.10.10.12 port 49152.
Finally another host sends traffic out to a Web server.
It's 10.10.10.13. This time using source port 49152. The router NATs
it to 203.0.113.6 port 4099.
We've already used up all the addresses in our NAT pool and if we were using just standard NAT, this
traffic would fail. But because we're using Dynamic NAT with overload, which is a form of PAT,
we can reuse that last IP address in the pool.
So this host also gets translated to 203.0.113.6 but the router makes sure
that it uses a different source port number this time.
It uses 4099.
So when the return traffic comes back from the server on the outside,
it's going to a destination of 203.0.113.6 port 4099.
The router knows that traffic for that IP address and port number pair needs to go to
10.10.10.13 port 49152 because it's got that matching entry in its NAT
translation table.
OK, so that is how PAT works.
How to actually configure it is a super similar configuration to what we did for our standard Dynamic NAT.
But this right here is showing the standard dynamic NAT configuration.
So interface fa0/0, that was facing towards the Internet.
We configure that with ip nat outside. Interface
fa2/0
was facing our host on the inside.
We configure that with ip nat inside. We configure a pool of global addresses, ip nat pool Flackbox
203.0.113.4 to 203.0.113.6 with a netmask
255.255.255.240
in our example because that's a subnet mask on the outside interface.
Then we create our access list to reference the inside hosts. Access list 1 permit 10.0.2.0
0.0.0.255.
And finally we tie the NAT pool and the access-list together with ip nat inside source list 1 pool
Flackbox.
So that's the same configuration that you saw in the last lab demo when we did the standard Dynamic
NAT configuration.
This is the one with the problem where we're we can only use however many IP addresses are in the pool.
So the example here for .4 to .6, that's three addresses. Only three hosts are going to be able to get
out at the same time before host is going to fail. How we can change this to being a PAT configuration,
which will allow multiple hosts to reuse that top address
in the pool is, drum roll. Exactly
the same configuration. We just put the keyword overlord at the end of  ip nat inside source list 1 pool
Flackbox config. So that command you see down at the bottom there, ip nat inside source list 1 pool
Flackbox.
We just say overload at the end.
Everything else, the configuration is exactly the same.
So like I said before, for real world deployments, you're pretty much always going to be using the
overload
keyword.
You're almost always going to have more hosts in the inside
than you've got IP addresses on the outside. You don't want to run out of addresses in your pool,
so you will configure it with the
overload keyword just like this.
OK, so that was how we do overload.
The last thing to show you is the last NAT scenario
to cover, is a small office which has not purchased a range of public IP addresses.
In this case, the outside interface facing the Internet will most likely get its IP address via DHCP
from the service provider.
So it's a small office.
They do have Internet connectivity, but they've only got a single IP address on the outside.
They haven't bought a range of IP addresses. Usually in that case, you're not going to have a single fixed
IP address.
You're going to get your IP address from DHCP.
And this gives us an issue for NAT because that DHCP address might change over time. The service provider
won't guarantee that the IP address stays the same.
So we can't specify a pool with a fixed IP address because it might work at first, but it will stop
working when the IP address changes that we get from a service provider.
But it's OK. There's is a solution for this. PAT can be used for multiple hosts to share a single
outside public IP address even when it's using DHCP.
The configuration is very similar to Dynamic NAT with overload, but it translates to the outside
interface rather than a pool of addresses.
So you must translate to the actual the interface rather than a specific IP address, because like I said,
the DHCP address that you get from the provider might change.
So our configuration for this, actually before I walked through
this, let's look back at the previous one again.
So when we had a pool, we specified the pool of addresses. Then we specified the access list, the host
on the inside, and then we mapped them together. When we're using the outside interface rather than
a pool,
obviously, we're not going to have the first of those 3 commands.
We're not going to have the pool configured.
So let's look at this configuration now. So on interface fa0/0 facing the interface,
I've got ip address dhcp there.
I say ip nat outside. Interface fa1/0 which is facing the inside hosts for this example,
is ip nat inside. The access-list is configured exactly the same.
access-list 1 permit 10.0.2.0 0.0.0.255 and then I say ip nat inside source list 1
interface fa0/0 overload.
So I'm not mapping the access list to a pool of addresses. I'm mapping it to the interface and it will
automatically use the IP address that is configured on that interface. And if I configured the overload keyword
at the end,
so all of my host in the inside will be able to use that one public IP address on the outside.
The router will be able to differentiate between them for returning traffic because it's going to have different
port numbers being used.
OK, and how we actually verify this is the same command as usual - show ip nat translations.
And when I do this, you can see we've got the same output here, but we can see all of the port numbers that
are being used there as well.
So that's how we get the router knows
which traffic is for what.
OK, that was it for PAT.
See you in the next lecture where we'll do our lab demo.